Prayer for the Future of the Dharma
from the Words of the Buddha1

sangye namzik tsuktor tamché kyob
To the buddhas: Vipaśyin, Śikhin, Viśvabhū,
khorwa jik dang sertub ösung dang
Krakucchanda, Kanakamuni, and Kāśyapa,
shakya tubpa gautam lha yi lha
And Śākyamuni—Gautama, deity of all deities,
sangye pawo dün la chaktsal lo
To the seven warrior-like buddhas, I pay homage!

semchen döndu dak gi ngön
“In the past, to benefit beings,
kawa gangshyik ché gyur dang
I bore all kinds of hardship,
dak gi dewa tangwa yi
And gave up my own happiness, through this
tenpa yün ring bar gyur chik
May the teachings blaze, long into the future!

ngé ngön nepé ché dak tu
“In the past, for the sake of the sick,
rang gi tsowa yong tangwé
I gave my life away;
semchen pongpa kyabpé chir
So, to protect the needy and the poor,
tenpa yün ring bar gyur chik
May the teachings blaze, long into the future!

bu dang bumo chungma dang
“By my giving up sons, daughters, and wives,
nor dang langchen shingta dang
Riches and elephants and chariots,
rinchen changchub chir tangwé
For the sake of the treasure of enlightenment,
tenpa yün ring bar gyur chik
May the teachings blaze, long into the future!

dak gi sangye rangsang gyé
“Through the offerings I made to the buddhas, pratyekabuddhas,
nyentö pa dang ma dang ni
Śrāvakas, male and female,
drangsong dak la chö jepé
And to the great sages,
tenpa yün ring bar gyur chik
May the teachings blaze, long into the future!

kalpa jewa dumar dak
“Through the sufferings I endured
dukngal natsok nyong gyur ching
For many millions of aeons,
changchub döndu tö tsalwé
Seeking instruction for the sake of enlightenment,
tenpa yün ring bar gyur chik
May the teachings blaze, long into the future!

dak gi tsultrim tulshyuk dang
“Through my conduct of discipline,
katub yün ring tenjé shing
And age-long asceticism,
chok chü sangye ngé chöpé
And my offerings to the buddhas of ten directions,
tenpa yün ring bar gyur chik
May the teachings blaze, long into the future!

dak ngön tsöndrü dang denpé
“Through my diligence in the past,
taktu ten ching parol nön
Constantly stable, and overcoming others’ disruption;
semchen tamché dral döndu
So as to liberate all beings,
tenpa yün ring bar gyur chik
May the teachings blaze, long into the future!

zö tul taktu tenjé shing
“Through my constant practice of patience
semchen nyönmong nyikma yi
And my tolerance of beings’ harmful acts
semchen ngen zöjé gyurpé
Caused by the degeneration of their negative emotions,
tenpa yün ring bar gyur chik
May the teachings blaze, long into the future!

samten namtar zukmé dang
“Through my concentration, perfect freedoms,2 formless absorptions,
tingdzin gangé jé nyepa
And samādhis as many as the grains of sand in the river Ganges—
gompé dé tü dak gi ni
Through the power of my meditation,
tenpa yün ring bar gyur chik
May the teachings blaze, long into the future!

yeshe döndu dak gi ngön
“Through seeking wisdom in the past,
katub nak dak tenjé shing
By practising austerities in the forest,
tenchö duma nyer tenpé
And teaching countless śāstras to others,
tenpa yün ring bar gyur chik
May the teachings blaze, long into the future!

tsewé gyu yi sha trak dang
“Through giving, out of love, my flesh and blood,
tsowa yongsu tang gyur ching
Giving my life away entirely,
yenlak nying lak tangpa yi
And giving arms and legs and every part of my body,
chö tsul nampar pel gyur chik
May the way of the Dharma flourish and expand!

dak ngön dikpé semchen nam
“In the past, with loving kindness, I caused
jampé salwar minjé shing
Harmful sentient beings to mature completely,
tekpa sum la rab köpé
And I led them to the three vehicles; through this
chö kyi chöjin gyé gyur chik
May the gift of Dharma thrive and grow!

dak ngön tabshé gyurpa na
“In the past, with skilful means and wisdom,
semchen ta ngen lé dral shying
I liberated sentient beings from perverse views,
yangdak ta la kö jepé
And led them to the correct view; through this
chö ni nampar pel gyur chik
May the Dharma increase in every way!

dak gi semchen du ngö shyi
“With the four means of attracting disciples,3
nyönmong mé lé tarjé shing
I released beings from the fire of the emotions,
dak gi pel dik pam jepé
And vanquished rampant negativity; through this
dak khor yün ring né gyur chik
May my followers remain, long into the future!

dak gi mutek chen shyendak
“I freed tīrthikas and others
tawé chu lé draljé té
From the rivers of different views,
yangdak ta la kö gyurpé
And led them to the correct view; through this
dak khor taktu gü gyur chik
May my followers always have devotion!
yün ring tenpa bar gyur chik
May the teachings blaze, long into the future!”

| Rigpa Translations.
↑ The first verse would appear to be taken from the Pratimokṣa-sūtra (so sor thar pa'i mdo),
while the remainder of the prayer, from the second verse onwards, is found in Atiśa Dīpaṃkaraśrījñāna's
Great Compendium of the Sūtras (Mahāsūtrasamuccaya; mdo kun las btus pa chen
po).↑ The eight perfect freedoms (rnam thar brgyad) are: 1) the perfect freedom of form
observing form (gzugs can gzugs la lta ba'i rnam thar); 2) the perfect freedom of the formless
observing form (gzugs med gzugs la lta ba'i rnam thar); 3) the perfect freedom of observing
beauty (sdug pa'i rnam thar); 4) the perfect freedom of infinite space (nam mkha' skye
mched kyi rnam thar); 5) the perfect freedom of infinite consciousness (rnam shes skye
mched kyi rnam thar); 6) the perfect freedom of nothing whatsoever (ci yang med skye mched
kyi rnam thar); 7) the perfect freedom of neither presence nor absence of perception ('du
shes med min skye mched kyi rnam thar); and 8) the perfect freedom of cessation ('gog pa'i
rnam thar).↑ The four means of attracting disciples (bsdu ba’i dngos po bzhi) are: 1) being
generous; 2) speaking pleasantly; 3) teaching according to individual needs; and 4) acting
in accordance with one’s teaching.