The Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra The Wisdom of the Hour of Death

from the Words of the Buddha

In the language of India: Āryātyaya jñāna nāma mahāyāna sūtraIn the language of Tibet:
’Phags pa ’da’ ka ye shes zhes bya ba theg pa chen po’i mdoIn the language of English: The
Noble Mahāyāna Sūtra The Wisdom of the Hour of Death

Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas!

Thus I have heard at one time. The Blessed One was dwelling in the palace of the king of gods
in Akaniṣṭha and teaching the Dharma to the entire retinue when the bodhisattva mahāsattva
Ākāśagarbha prostrated to the Blessed One and asked him the following question, “O Blessed
One, how should a bodhisattva view the mind at the moment of death?”

The Blessed One replied, “Ākāśagarbha, at the time of death, the bodhisattva should cultivate
the wisdom of the hour of death. As for wisdom of the hour of death, you should cultivate
the perception of insubstantiality since all phenomena are naturally pure. You should cultivate
the perception of great compassion since all phenomena are contained within bodhicitta.
You should cultivate the perception of referencelessness since all phenomena are naturally
luminous. You should cultivate the perception of utter non-attachment since all things
are impermanent. You should cultivate the perception of not searching for buddhahood elsewhere
since the mind is wisdom when realized.” The Blessed One then spoke in verse:

Since all things are by nature pureCultivate the perception of insubstantiality.Since they are
possessed of bodhicittaCultivate the perception of great compassion.Since all phenomena
are by nature luminousCultivate the perception of referencelessness.Since all things are
impermanentCultivate the perception of non-attachment.The mind is what causes wisdom’s arisingAnd
so, look not for buddhahood elsewhere!

As the Blessed One spoke thus, Ākāśagarbha and the entire gathering all rejoiced with delight
and praised what the Blessed One had taught.

This completes the noble Mahāyāna sūtra, The Wisdom of the Hour of Death.

| Translated by Lowell Cook, 2018.

Version: 1.2-20211115