The Ultimate Inexpressible Confession
From the Immaculate Confession Tantra

hung, yeshe ku chok rangshyin kyilkhor ni
Hūṃ. The natural maṇḍala of the supreme wisdom kāya
da gyé shyindu tröpa mi nga yang
Has no elaborate complexity, just like the full moon,
tukjé nyi sal ö shyin nyom dzepa
Yet its compassion radiates as evenly as sunlight.
dir shek dak la gong shing shyuk su sol
Approach now, I pray: consider me, and remain!

jömé sherab miyo chö kyi ku
Inexpressible wisdom, which is the immovable dharmakāya;
dechen longchö dzok ku rik ngé tso
Lords of the five families, the sambhogakāya of great bliss;
tukjé tabkhé gyacher rolpé lha
And deities who display vast compassion and skilful means,
shyitro trulpé ku la chaktsal lo
Nirmāṇakāya, peaceful and wrathful: to you I pay homage!

ngö su jor dang yi kyi nam trulpé
Actual offerings and those created in the imagination,
kuntuzangpo lamé chötrin gyi
As Samantabhadra’s unsurpassable, cloud-like bestowal,
khaying namdak gyacher yong kö dé
Arranged extensively throughout space’s pure expanse—
chi nang sangwé chöpa gyatsö chö
With an ocean of outer, inner and secret gifts, I offer!

kuntuzangmo sangwé bhaga la
Through an experience of single taste, beyond union and separation,
gyalwé kyilkhor rabjam malü kün
Wherein all the infinite maṇḍalas of the victorious buddhas
dudral mepé ngang du ro chikpé
Are present in the secret bhaga of Samantabhadrī —
nyimé changchub sem kyi nyé gyur chik
May non-dual bodhicitta delight you!

sem kyi rangshyin chönyi namkha ché
The nature of mind is the great space of dharmatā;
chö nam namdak yené ösal shying
Phenomena, utterly pure, have always been clear light;
naljor nyi ying ma sam lé depé
And the realm of this yoga is beyond speech and thought—
nyamnyi changchub sem la taktu dü
To this bodhicitta of equality, I offer perpetual homage!

kunzang dzogchen yené dalwa la
Within the ever-excellent, originally expansive great perfection
chi nang sangwé köpé kyilkhor ni
Is the maṇḍala arrayed with outer, inner and secret aspects;
nangsi namdak lha dang lhamö ying
Pure apparent existence is the sphere of male and female deities;
jung dang jung gyur yabyum lhün dzok nam
And elements and elemental, spontaneously perfect buddha pairs.
sang chen rab gyé zung chen daknyimé
The great consort revels in the magnificent secret;
khaying long yang pemor khyilwa la
And in the sovereign lady’s lotus, the vast expanse of space,
nyimé tiklé chenpor ösal shying
Within the great non-dual bindu, there is clear light
machö trömé changchub nyingpö ku
And bodhi-essence kāya, uncontrived and unelaborate.
chiryang nangwa dechen yungdrung lha
All that appears is the everlasting deity of great bliss.
dudral mepa sangwé kyilkhor ni
In the secret maṇḍala that is beyond union and separation
daknyi chenpo rik nga yabyum dang
Are sovereigns, male and female buddhas of the five families,
changchub chamdral trowo tromö tsok
Bodhisattvas and hosts of wrathful ones, male and female.
dorjé lhamo tsok jé tsok kyi dak
Lord over hosts of vajra goddesses, master of the assembly,
rik nga palchen trogyal yabyum chu
Glorious ones of the five families, ten wrathful kings and consorts,
né dang yul gyi chakgya goma shyi
Female guardians of sacred lands and places, four female gatekeepers,
yeshe trulpé lhatsok mangpo nam
The many hosts of deities who are wisdom emanations,
ma tar jam shing sing tar dung lasok
Those who are caring like mothers and supportive as sisters,
leknyé tangdzin damtsik jé chöpé
Who determine good and bad and evaluate samaya,
chi nang khandro naljorma yi tsok
Hosts of outer and inner ḍākinīs and yoginīs,
pang gyur dorjé damchen gong su sol
Witnesses and holders of vajra commitments, consider me!

hung, tukjé dungtsob naljor dakchak gi
Hūṃ. We vidyādharas, successors of the compassionate,
drowé döndu changchub semkyé dé
Generate bodhicitta for the sake of all living beings.
lamé gopang dröpar jawé chir
And, in order to progress to the unsurpassable state,
tenpa gyatso sosö dul trim dang
Uphold various disciplines from the oceanic teachings:
ku sung tuk dang nyamjor dompé chok
The supreme pledge to unite with enlightened body, speech and mind,
dorjé da ka damtsik ten gyi nyer
The vajra samaya, terrible to transgress, ever to be maintained,
chi dang khyepar lhakpé damtsik nam
Both the general and special, higher commitments
ngachir nö shing nyer du mé so tsal
We have received time and again and sworn to uphold.
yündu mitong dawar migyi ching
We do not intentionally neglect or transgress our vows,
dön lé gol shying dok sem machi kyang
Waver in our purpose or turn away from it entirely,
döja long yö nyampé lelo yi
Yet through the laziness of postponing actions,
long du magyur tsalshuk chungwa dang
We fail to gain mastery and have very little fortitude,
sheshyin miden bakmé wanggyur té
We lack vigilance and stray into carelessness.
gom la mitsön nyendrub yel lasok
We make no effort in meditation, neglect approach and accomplishment, and more.
tsor dang matsor marik wang gi na
Knowingly and unknowingly, through our own ignorance,
tönpé ka dang dam lé gal gyur té
We transgress the teacher’s commands and contravene commitments.
naljor gangshyik damtsik nyampa dang
“A yogi must never associate, even for an instant,
kechik tsam yang trepar mija shyé
With one who has transgressed the samaya.”
ka lé jung shying detar machok té
Such is the command, yet we fail to observe it.
sang go cholwé yesal kawa dang
Confused as to the secret mantra’s entrance, discernment proves difficult;
ngönshé mepé kyönchen matok té
Without higher perception, we do not recognize those at fault.
nyam dang tsok dré nyampa kangwa dang
We mix with transgressors in the assembly and restore their transgressions;
nyam dang nömin nam la chö shé dang
We teach Dharma to transgressors and unsuitable recipients;
nyam la midzem nyampé kyön lasok
We do not avoid transgressors, but incur the fault of transgression and more;
nyam dang drok shing nyampa dedak gi
Thus we have kept company with transgressors
nyamdrib kyön gyi göpar gyur to tsal
And been sullied by their corrupting, transgressive influence.
tsé di kyen dang yün gyi drib gyur nam
Such failings, which affect this life and cause long-term obscuration,
rab nong gyöpé sem kyi tol lo shak
We now confess with a mind of intense remorse and regret.

jampé tukjé dak la gong né kyang
Consider us with loving kindness and compassion,
nyimé ying lé mingyur dak kö dé
And secure us steadfastly in the non-dual realm.
mimik tangnyom ngang du shyuk né kyang
As you abide in non-referential equanimity,
nyimé dön gyi tsangpa tsal du sol
Grant us the ultimate, non-dual absolution!

döndam mikmé trö lé depa la
In the ultimate, beyond reference and elaboration,
namtok gangyang mikpar mingyur ching
There is no conceptualising thought whatsoever;
kündzob gyuma tsam gyi wang gi na
Yet should we err through the relative, mere illusion,
nongpa chi na rab nong zöpar sol
This we intensely regret: forgive us, we pray!

From the Fourth Chapter of the Immaculate Confession Tantra, Confession of Discord with the
Wisdom Deities.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey 2019, with reference to commentaries by Katok Yeshe Gyaltsen, Jigme
Lingpa and Rigdzin Gargyi Wangchuk.

Version: 1.2-20211001