The Perfection of Wisdom, Mother of All Tathāgatas, ‘In One Syllable’1
from the Words of the Buddha

In the language of India: Ekākṣarī-mātā-nāma-sarva-tathāgata-prajñā-pāramitā
In the language of Tibet: Deshin shekpa tamché kyi yum sherab kyi parol tu chinma yigé chikma
shé chawa (de bzhin gshegs pa thams cad kyi yum shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin ma yi ge gcig
ma zhes bya ba)
In the English language: The Perfection of Wisdom, Mother of All Tathāgatas, ‘In One Syllable’

yum chenmo sherab kyi parol tu chin ma la chaktsal lo
Homage to the Great Mother Prajñāpāramitā!

diké dak gi töpa dü chik na
Thus have I heard:
chomdendé gyalpö khabja gö pungpö ri la
At one time the Blessed One was dwelling in Rājgṛha at Vulture Peak mountain,
gelong gi gendün chenpo gyatrak ché dang chusum dang
Together with a great gathering of twelve hundred and fifty monks,
changchub sempa jewa trak trik mangpo dang tab chik tu shyuk so
And a great gathering of myriad bodhisattva mahāsattvas.
dé tsé chomdendé kyi tsé dang denpa küngawo la diké ché katsal to
At that time, the Blessed One said to venerable Ānanda:
küngawo sherab kyi parol tu chinpa yigé chik ma shyejawa di semchen nam la penpa dang dewé chir
zung shik
O Ānanda, since The Perfection of Wisdom ‘In One Syllable’ will bring benefit and happiness
to sentient beings, please remember it!
di ta té
It is like this:
a
A
chomdendé kyi deké ché katsal pa dang
When the Blessed One had said this,
tsé dang denpa küngawo dang gelong dedak dang changchub sempa sempa chenpo dedak tamché kyi
parol tu chinpa jesu tok shing yirang né
Venerable Ānanda together with all the monks and bodhisattva mahāsattvas realized the perfection
of wisdom.
chomdendé kyi sungpa la ngönpar tö do
They rejoiced, and thus praised the speech of the Blessed One.

Thus concludes The Perfection of Wisdom, Mother of All Tathāgatas, ‘In One Syllable’.

| Translated by Stefan Mang, 2019.

Version: 1.2-20211116
↑ Please note that the Tibetan text varies greatly depending on the edition consulted. The following
Tibetan edition and English translation is based on the Dergé Kangyur edition (Tōh.
23: sher phyin yi ge gcig ma).