The Lament of Rudra
from the Immaculate Confession Tantra

emaho
Emaho!
tukjé chenpo chomden dorjé sem
Great compassionate one, the conqueror Vajrasattva,
drimé dung dok chok tu zuk zangwa
Supreme in appearance, the colour of a pristine conch,
namdak ösal da ö kyil na dzé
Pure and luminous, resplendent in your moonlight halo,
pawo özer tong bar lammewa
A brave warrior illuminated by a thousand brilliant rays.
sipa sum gyi sa khen tönpar drak
Renowned as a guide to those in the three planes of existence,
kham sum drowa kün gyi nyen chikpo
Sole companion to all beings throughout the triple realm,
jam gön tukjé lha khyö gong su sol
Kind protector, compassionate deity, heed me now, I pray.
dak ni tokma mepé dü ta né
Throughout the whole of beginningless time,
lam lok lam tor sipé khorwar khyam
I have taken wrong paths, lost my way, and wandered in saṃsāra.
ngöntsé lé lok dikpa jepé nong
Through past misdeeds and harmful actions, I have gone astray.
dikpé lé nam chi ché rang nong gyö
Whatever negative acts I have committed, I now remorsefully admit.
dar shying drakpé lé wang dé tsenpé
Through the powerful force of terrible, intensifying karma,
khorwé dukngal gyatsor jing gyur té
I am immersed in the great ocean of suffering within saṃsāra:
shyedang barwé mé ni ranggyü sek
The raging infernos of aggression set my mind ablaze,
timuk münpa tibpé sherab dong
The thick darkness of ignorance blinds my intellect,
döchak gyatsö dam du namshé jing
The muddy swamp of desire draws in my sinking consciousness,
ngagyal drekpé riwö ngendror nen
The mountain of arrogant pride pushes me down to evil destinies,
trakdok lungmar tsubpé khorwar yeng
And the tempestuous winds of jealousy sweep me into saṃsāra.
dak tu tawé düpa dampö ching
I am bound by the tight knots of the view of self,
döpa medak dong dré ob su lhung
Flung into the pit of passion’s burning embers,
dukngal drakpo mi zé char tar bab
And intense, unbearable suffering pours down upon me like rain.
dindré dukngal shintu zö ka shying
Such miserable torment is extremely difficult to endure,
dikpé lé wang drakpo mebarwé
And the raging fires of powerfully negative actions
namshé wangpö nyugu dung gyur té
Have caused the shoots of my consciousness to wither.
pungpo gyumé lü kyi mi zö na
It is too much for this body of illusory aggregates to bear.
jam gön tukjé chen gyi zö lak sam
Can you, my kind and compassionate protector, acquiesce?
dak dra lün mong lé ngen dikpo ché
I, so foolish and deluded, a doer of terrible, wicked deeds,
lé kyi wang gi dökham rudrar kyé
Have, through force of karma, been born as rudra in this desire realm.
kyepé gyö do lé la yi ré ché
How I regret such a rebirth! How my past actions depress me!
yiché gyö kyang lé la chö su mé
Yet for all my despondency and remorse, there can be no remedy.
lé kyi shuk ni chuwö gyün dang dra
The force of my karma is like the flow of a river in spate—
lé wang chulung tral du gala dok
How could this stream of karma be suddenly reversed?
nammin tamché rang gi lé lé jung
All these karmic effects have come about through my own actions.
ka la shyuk kyang ka shyin ngo ma tok
I received instructions, but could not do as I was told.
lü ngak yi sum dikpé wang du song
With body, speech, and mind, I slipped into negativity.
lé kyi lungmar drakpo dé depé
Swept along by the fierce winds of karma,
dak ni dengön kalpa drangmé du
Through countless ages in the past,
khorwé tsönra münpar khyampa la
I wandered through the dark dungeons of saṃsāra.
nyené khyé kyi tukjé jinlab kyi
Now through your compassionate blessings,
lé dang nyönmong dribpa né jang né
Karmic and emotional obscurations are purified at their source,
ma tar jampé shyab drung dantar khö
And I find myself before you who are a font of motherly love,
nyi tar öbar da tar dang salwé
You who are as dazzling as the sun, as radiant as the moon.
tukjé shyal nyi tawé mi ngompa
With your face of compassion at which I never tire of looking.
tokma mé né marik ling tok gi
I have been blind throughout beginningless time,
dongpé chubur mik gi ma tong na
Unable to see you through the cataracts of ignorance.
drowé gön khyö dengön gang na shyuk
Protector of beings, where were you in the past?
lé wang drakpo rabtu mizepé
So utterly unbearable is karma’s intense force,
shintu trak ching kyi ya rab jik né
That I shiver in terror and tremble in fright,
dung dung dungwé mengak di dön ching
And cry out in this longing, sorrowful lament.
nyamtak pongpé ngarö dön lak na
As I call to you in my weariness and distress,
jam gön tukjé dü dir ma gong na
If you do not consider me, O kind, compassionate protector,
namshyik chipo lü sem dralwé tsé
Then, when death comes and it’s time for body and mind to part,
geshé drok dangdral né shinjé tri
I will leave my teacher and friends as Yama leads me away.
detsé jikten nyé dü mi tong té
Then, in a world bereft of friends and dear relations,
lé kyi wang gi daknyi chikpur tri
I will be led on alone, carried by the force of karma.
dü der dak la gön kyab ma chi na
At that time, if I should lack refuge or protection,
gang gi chishol dü lé mashyepar
Please do not hesitate for any reason,
danta nyi du tün té ngönchö dzö
But act directly and forcefully, right away.
lé kyi narwé kyewo dak drawa
Those who are tormented by karma, as I am,
tokma mepé dü né lok takpé
Have misunderstood throughout beginningless time,
kham sum khorwé né lé ma tar té
Failed to escape the abodes of saṃsāra’s three realms,
kalpa drangmé kyewa jinyé du
And in the course of many lives throughout unnumbered ages,
dö ché lü lang drangmé shyik gyur té
Have taken on countless bodily forms, all of which decayed.
sha rü sak na jikten tö dang nyam
Our flesh and bones, if amassed, would span the universe.
naktrak sak na gyatso chenpo tsam
Our pus and blood, if collected, would be equal to the oceans.
letro sak na sam dé jö mi lang
Our actions, if enumerated, would defy thought and utterance.
kham sum drang shing kyeshi kha gyü kyang
In the course of these rounds of birth and death in the three realms
jepé lé nam dönmé chü ré zö
All that we have done has been to no avail.
kyewa drangmé jinyé detsam gyi
In all these countless rebirths
kyewa tsé chik khona tsam gyi lé
If the acts of just a single lifetime
lamé changchub döndu rab ché na
Had been dedicated to unsurpassed awakening
detsam jepé lé ladön rab yö
That alone would have been supremely purposeful.
dön gyi yongyé nya ngen dé zin na
Surely I would thus have reached nirvāṇa.
lé kyi wang tsen nyönmong tob chewé
Yet through karma’s force and the great strength of the afflictions,
sha trak düpé lü lang khorwar khyam
I took on forms of flesh and blood to wander in saṃsāra,
dukngal zö ka sipé tsönrar tsü
Imprisoned in existence where distress is hard to bear.
mi zé drakpö dukngal di tabu
Such miseries as these, unbearable in intensity—
nyejé tamché rang gi lé lé jung
Every form of harm has arisen from my own deeds.
tukjé chenpö lé ngen gyün ché dé
In your great compassion, put an end to my wicked ways,
nyönmong lé kyi lung di dok tu sol
And repel the winds of karma and affliction, I pray.
marik lokpé lé dé wang tsenpé
When, through the force of ignorant, mistaken acts,
mi shé münpé nang du ten khyam na
I must wander forever in the darkness of unknowing,
yeshe drönmé zer gyi mi tong sam
Will you not assist me with the light of wisdom’s torch?
nyejé lé kyi nammin mi zö na
When the ripening of past misdeeds is intolerable,
tukjé chenpö trinlé mi dzé dam
Will you not take action out of great compassion?
chin chi lok gi yangsar lhung lak na
When I have fallen into the abyss of errant ways,
tukjé nyur gyok chak gi mi dzin nam
Will you not catch me with the swift hand of mercy?
duk sum zö ké né kyi dung lak na
When I am stricken with the unendurable malady of the three poisons,
tabkhé tukjé men gyi mi so’am
Will you not heal me with the medicine of compassionate skill-in-means?
lé kyi nammin dukngal mebar na
When the fires of karmic ripening and suffering rage,
tukjé silwé char gyün mi beb sam
Will you not bring the cooling rains of mercy?
dukngal khorwé dam du jing gyur na
When I sink into the muddy swamp of saṃsāric suffering,
tabkhé tukjé chakkyü mi dren nam
Will you not pull me out with the hook of compassionate skill-in-means?
kham sum khorwé né su jang jang né
When, having repeatedly trained myself in the states of saṃsāra’s three realms,
namshyik rang gi drebu tobpé tsé
I eventually attain the fruition for myself,
pakpé tukjé chi tsal dön ma chi
Of what use will the Noble One’s compassion be?
daknyi letrö wang tsen shyak na ta
Were you to leave me to the force of karmic throes,
tukjé cheshyé su la chishyik gyi
How could I then refer to you as generous of heart?
pawo khyö la tukjé tob nga shying
Heroic One, you possess the strength of compassion,
ngön jung drelwé lé kyi tro tsen na
So when the karma of past connections overwhelms me,
yalyol tangnyom lelo ma dzepar
Do not remain inattentive, unconcerned or passive,
nying né da zik tukjé gyalwé lha
But heed my heart’s plea, right now, O sovereign deity of compassion!

This is the confession of the arrogant ones.
From the Immaculate Confession Tantra, this concludes the Lament of Rudra. May virtue abound.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2020.