The Clarifying Light: A Prophecy of the Future

from the Words of the Buddha
compiled by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö[1]

Homage to the Three Jewels.[2]

The Blessed One taught the following text, which is of benefit during an evil age.

The range of what is called Dharma is likened to a path. Why? It is on this path that all living
beings travel. That is why the Dharma is said to be like a path.

Once, when the Blessed One was seated beneath the bodhi tree, he saw all the living beings of
Jambudvīpa. He saw that at the end of time, in the five-hundred-year period, an age of evil
would arise. As to the thoughts and deeds of all beings, those people who encounter this
text through their tenfold purity will be greatly meritorious, while those who do not encounter
this text will be weak in merit and experience intense pain due to the afflictions.
Human beings upon the earth will feel as if hacked apart with weapons.

Then, venerable Ānanda said to the Blessed One, "O Blessed One, since you consider human beings
with compassion, please save them from this suffering."

The Blessed One said to venerable Ānanda, "I shall explain to you. I was abiding in the expanse
of space. I directed my intention to view the living beings of Jambudvīpa. Listen, all
of you, to my words. This Dharma text is a teaching that will be of benefit when an age of
evil arises. To write it out and recite it and practise the visualization and recitation
of the Great Compassionate One will swiftly purify all harmful actions and obscurations.
Honouring this text with offerings of incense and flowers will bring about the happiness of
all sentient beings. Writing out and reciting this text will lead to excellent rebirth throughout
all future lives."

At the foot of the tree was a great lake, on the shores of which sat the emanation of Great
Compassion, who had directed his magnanimity towards all living beings and was weeping intensely.
The Blessed One said:

"Great Compassionate One, listen well. There is no need to weep. Listen well to what I have
to say. In the tiger month of the new year I decided to go to the human realm.[3] At that
time I freed all the beings of the age of evil from the ocean of suffering that is saṃsāra.
They renounced all harmful action. I even guided the beings who had fallen into the hells.
At that time, I spread this dharma text. Writing or reciting this text will put an end
to all sickness. Any person who writes it out will benefit a whole town. Any town where it
is written will benefit a whole country. The merit of human beings will increase, and negative
circumstances and obstacles will be averted. It will bring release from the sufferings
of the hells. It will be of benefit in both present and future lives. This is the essential
path for all beings of the six classes. It is comparable to sailing in a boat across
an ocean or river. Having faith in, and pure devotion towards, this text is crucial. Until
Maitreya arrives in the human realm this text will yield extensive benefit. Writing out this
Dharma and sharing it with others will bring boundless merit within the same lifetime
and the same body. It will cause the blood-filled ocean of saṃsāra to dry up.

"By means of ten mental impurities, beings will first be overwhelmed by the afflictions. How
worthy of compassion are all beings! Thereafter, second, the human realm will become a valley
filled with blood. Third, although crops are planted and the land cultivated, there will
be no freedom to enjoy the results.[4] Fourth, human beings will experience intense suffering.
Fifth, people will lack vision while travelling on paths.[5] Sixth, cities will be
overrun by carnivorous wild animals. Seventh, buildings within countries will lie empty.[6]
Eighth, carnivorous wild animals will be seen wandering about aimlessly.[7] Ninth, although
a few people will remain they will not dare to stay. Tenth, hungry ghosts and harmful
spirits will appear, roaming through cities. This is what will come to pass based on the
ten impurities.

"People will lack respect for one another and appear to praise themselves while disparaging
others. There are four classes in human society: rulers, merchants, labourers and priests.[8]
If they all have confidence in and reverence for this text the age will be one of fortune."


The Blessed One said, "Those who distrust this text will mislead one another and fall into the
hell of ultimate torment (avīci). They will not hear the Dharma, and their cries of anguish
will be heard throughout heaven and earth. An age of epidemics will dawn.[9] To write
down or recite this dharma text immediately upon hearing it will overcome all epidemics and
famine. It will bring excellent rebirth.

"There are seven forms of suffering in this world:[10] first, there is the suffering of heat
and cold in the hells; second, the suffering of hunger and thirst among the pretas; third,
the suffering of ignorance and confusion among animals;[11] fourth, the suffering of birth,
old age, sickness and death, as well as lack of freedom, poverty and adherence to wrong
views among human beings;[12] fifth, the suffering of hostility and conflict among the asuras;[13]
sixth, the suffering of death, transmigration and downfall among the gods;[14]
and seventh, the suffering of the bardo of becoming. Having confidence in this text, which
is of benefit in these circumstances, will cause all wishes to be fulfilled and all disease
to be eliminated. It will bring the excellent fortune of a bygone age.

"You might wonder why this is so. In a male Fire Horse year, a meteor the size of a large rock[15]
will fall from the expanse of space and land on the shore of a large body of water.[16]
When that meteorite cracks open, this text will emerge from it. It will then be crucially
important for this dharma text to be passed on from one person to another and not kept
hidden or secret. This is not intended for only one or two individuals; it has been set
down for the sake of all sentient beings. May all the sufferings of saṃsāra come to an end!

"In future, at the end of the five-hundred-year period,When the teachings of the Buddha are
in decline,When the discipline of monks has deteriorated,When minds are occupied with negative
thoughts,When people feast on broken pledges and misdeeds,When they engage in the ten
unwholesome actions,When mantra practitioners recite evil spells,When the five poisons are
nurtured deep within,When people misbehave physically and verbally,When dharma teaching
is in terminal decline,When bird feathers develop on hillsides,[17]When wood is kept in an
iron case,[18]When people commit wicked deeds,All these actions, faults and defects[19]Will
surely herald a fearful time of crisis.This text that dispels the conditions of an evil
ageMust be written out or recited immediately upon sight—Have no doubt that this will avert
the evils of the age.It is enough to inquire whether this is true.Let us speak and express
only truth.All those who claim that this is untrueWill be struck by the symptoms of diseaseFrom
the tips of the hair on their headDown to the very tips of their toes."

When the Blessed One had said this, the Great Compassionate One, Maitreya, Ānanda, and the whole
world with its human beings, asuras and gandharvas rejoiced and praised the speech of
the Blessed One.

Then the Blessed One extended his right hand, beautifully adorned with the marks and signs,
and touched it to the ground, thereby subjugating evil demonic forces together with their
retinues. One must train in this transcendent perfection of wisdom, which brings inconceivable
joy and mental wellbeing and which subjugates and pacifies illness and demonic forces.
Then the Blessed One entered the Ganges-like meditative absorption[20] and spoke this text
which summarizes all the excellent teachings of the sūtras.

Ānanda then addressed the Blessed One once again: "Blessed One, this Dharma that you have taught
is for the purpose of averting obstacles and negative circumstances in saṃsāra. In the
male Earth Monkey year an epidemic will occur, and it will be crucial to have a profound
means of addressing it. If beings should doubt the truth of this and lack confidence in this
text, neglecting it out of indifference so that it cannot spread,[21] this will only delight
the demonic forces. But for this text to be copied and trusted will bring much happiness.
This dharma text will bring relief."

The Blessed One replied:[22]

"Good, good. That is exceedingly good.This is to be taught everywhere from early on,And an excellent
wealth of virtue will result.Merit and qualities will fully unfold.All the perfect
buddhas have spoken thus.Nanda, Upananda, and the rest of you,Exert yourselves in this,
which is beneficial to beings.In future, at the end of time,The virtue of this will be beyond
imagining.For anyone who has faith in thisAll wishes will be fulfilled,Obstacles and adversity
will be banished.A person with faith in the Buddha's teachingsShould make offerings
with incense and flowers."

Then the protector Maitreya looked out from the expanse of space and saw that human beings were
shedding tears of blood. He went before the Blessed One and said, "Blessed One, I beseech
you to impart a Dharma for the future that conveys its message in few words but holds
great blessings."

The Blessed One replied:

"Maitreya, that is excellent.Listen to this speech of mine.It is imparted for the sake of all
beingsIncluding the likes of Brahmā and Śakra.In order to benefit all living beingsI have
verbally communicated this message.It is to be respected and diligently applied,As it will
bring an abundance of virtue.

"Later, in the first month of autumn during the male Fire Horse year and in the male Earth Monkey
year, evil people who lack faith in this text will meet their deaths. Those people who
copy or recite this text will lead long lives, enjoy good health and gain much merit. All
the harmful forces of this evil age will come to roam about the towns. Invisible to human
beings, they will pass through uncertain places while remaining hidden. At that time the
blessings of this dharma text will cause all spirits, evil forces and harmful influences
to shudder and flee. It is vital that this text be disseminated throughout every land. Do
not consider it untrue or harbour doubt.

"For those who lack faith in this Dharma taught by the wise and venerable Buddha, Sugata, knower
of the world, guide and tamer of beings, unsurpassed teacher of gods and men, awakened
and transcendent conqueror, a great earthquake will occur in a Fire Horse year. The crisis
that arises at this time will intensify in a female Fire Sheep year, and some people will
contract diseases due to defilement (grib) and die.[23] Some will die on roads, and some
will die in landslides.[24]

"In a male Earth Monkey year there will be terrifying floods. In the summer, sickness brought
on by famine will cause loss of life. At that time, harmful spirits will overrun the land.
Copying and reciting this teaching will afford protection against harmful influences and
obstacle-makers.

"In a female Earth Bird year it will be crucially important to avoid harming others, to refrain
from consuming flesh or blood, and to guard one's vows.

"In a male Iron Dog year lands and cities will be overrun by tigers, leopards, bears, wolves
and jackals. It will be crucial at that time to copy and recite this Dharma as a means of
liberation for human beings.

"In a female Iron Sheep year[25] all sentient beings will come to lack self-control, like paper
blown about in the wind or like a great lake that surges and overflows. At that time those
people who lack faith in this text will die."

Then the Blessed One said to the Great Compassionate One:

"In a year of the Mouse the melodious sound of Dharma will emanate from the expanse of space.
If one were then to copy or recite this text which radiates throughout all four cardinal
and eight intermediate directions with the power and strength of the buddhas' blessings,
like the light of the sun and moon, it would bring benefit until Maitreya arrives. Such is
the potential of this text.

"If this is copied or recited aloudIt will bring mountainous merit.In a palace upon Mount PotalaResides
the emanation of buddha speechSurrounded by a retinue of bodhisattvas.Above, below
and in each of the ten directions—Beings everywhere he leads to happiness.

"Moreover, the Great Compassionate One considered all human beings with compassion and disseminated
this text[26] for the sake of sentient beings. When it is doubted and considered untrue,
then in the first and middle months of summer an epidemic will arise. People will fall
sick in the morning and die in the evening.[27] At that time, as the age of crisis unfolds,
plants and forests will be hacked and hewn, rocky mountains will crumble from their
base, and the earth will tremble and quake, as if incapable of remaining still. No more than
one in ten people will survive. Do not think this untrue, for it is the word of the Blessed
One.[28] How worthy of compassion are all beings!

"Then, in a female Fire Sheep year and male Earth Monkey year the evil 'five-hundred-year' period
will dawn. Conflict will arise from all around—the four cardinal and eight intermediate
directions. Human beings will quarrel and fight among themselves.[29] This is a Dharma
that liberates from the ravages of time. To copy and recite it upon first sight will overcome
conflict. This text, which brings wellbeing if copied or recited, will bring boundless
virtue and liberate from every fear and concern.

"This dharma text is not for only one or two individuals; it was composed for the sake of all
sentient beings. If this dharma text is distributed throughout every land in all directions
human beings will enjoy excellent happiness and wellbeing. Through an abundance of virtue,[30]
the sufferings of sentient beings will end.

"Unless this text is diligently recollected for five or six months, an age of epidemics will
dawn. Some will die from fever; some will die from colds; some will lose their sanity and
die;[31] some will die from a sickness of the throat;[32] some will die from a sickness of
the heart; some will experience intestinal pain and then die; some will die from sickness
of the liver. There is a remedy for these harmful spirits and sicknesses.[33]

"Sons and daughters of noble family should keep on their bodies this text which guards against
and remedies these forms of sickness and harmful influence. The mantra that guards against,
and liberates from, all divine spirits, nāga spirits, elemental spirits and epidemics—Emaho,
p'en no p'en no svāhā—[34] should be worn by males on their right side and by females
on their left. Doing so will liberate from all epidemics and bring excellent rebirth.
There is no doubt that copying, reciting and having faith in this will bring freedom from
the blood-filled ocean of suffering that is saṃsāra.

How worthy of compassion are all the people between heaven and earth![35] May all the sicknesses
that cause untimely death among human beings be utterly pacified! May beings come to
have the excellence of bygone ages! May they come to possess merit beyond measure.

For beings who lack faith in this dharma text there will be no time of liberation.[36] Towns
will be overrun by various forms of harmful spirits. At that time the cries of people will
fill the air and resound across the earth.[37] Although there will be nutritious fruit and
grain, everyone will lack the power to consume it. The whole population will eat demonic
food.[38]

Then, the Great Compassionate One, noble Avalokiteśvara, spoke the following[39] so that beings
might arouse compassion in their minds: "Blessed One, I pray that you may infuse this
text with your blessings. Consecrate it with magnetising powers, I pray."

Then the Blessed One said, "If this text is venerated with faith and devotion evil times will
come to an end. It will bring the boundless merit of freedom from every form of contagious
disease. Let all human beings on this earth be freed from the conflict, disease and misery
of an evil age and gain all the excellence of a bygone era.[40]

"In accordance with this aspiration for the sake of virtue,[41] and especially if this is recited
during both the horse month[42] and rabbit month[43] it will bring unimaginable beneficial
qualities. People who copy and recite this text will enjoy long lives, good health
and happiness.[44] Partially copying the text will pacify all the causes of harm in an age
of evil.

This circulated once during a past Dragon year.[45] It was apparently unable to spread throughout
the world. This is how the evil age first took hold. Later, the text was circulated
in a male Fire Horse year.

This dharma text is the means of averting evil times. Unless it can spread throughout all lands,
crops will be ruined by blight, hail and frost, leading to famine. An epidemic of unrecognisable
sickness will emerge bringing pain and misery. There is no doubt that copying
or reciting this will bring liberation from all suffering.

Until the victorious protector Maitreya arrives in this world, this dharma text serves as a
refuge to beings. For those with faith in it and devotion for it let it cleanse and purify
all harmful actions, obscurations and habitual tendencies. May harvests be forever excellent!
May virtue be abundant! May this be a gem-like source of all that is wished for and required![46]
May everything throughout all these lands be auspicious! May every place become
resplendent! With sickness, famine and warfare utterly overcome, may rains bring excellent
harvests and may all wishes be spontaneously fulfilled! With wealth and prosperity extending
throughout the land, may the Wheel of Dharma turn and forever remain secure.

When the Blessed One had said this, the Great Compassionate One, Maitreya, Ānanda, and the whole
world including gods, human beings, asuras and gandharvas rejoiced and praised the speech
of the Blessed One.

This concludes The Clarifying Light: A Prophecy of the Future.[47]

| Translated by Adam Pearcey 2020, with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and
Terton Sogyal Trust, and with the gracious assistance of Alak Zenkar Rinpoche.