Verses of Confession
from the Immaculate Confession Tantra

dü sum dé shek gyalwa khor dang ché
Victorious sugatas of past, present and future, together with your retinues,
dorjé damchen ma lü gong su sol
And all you protectors bound by your vajra oath, turn your attention towards us!
dang por changchub chok tu sem kyé dé
First we arouse bodhicitta and set our minds upon supreme awakening.
drubpé rigdzin changchub go pang du
Then, to reach the enlightened stage of an accomplished vidyādhara,
ku sung tuk kyi dorjé drubpé chir
And achieve the vajra body, speech and mind,
yidam lha dang dorjé lobpön dang
We bring to mind each category of samaya commitment
sangwé damtsik drang su nöpa la
To the yidam deity and the vajra master, together with all the secret commitments,
damcha ka lé dawar mi gyi té
And make a pledge never to transgress the commands,
lé dang kalwé nyalwar kyéwar gyur
Or else be born in hell according to our karmic fortune.
dö chak shyé dang timuk nga gyal dang
Straying into desire, anger, dull indifference, pride,
trak dok la sok shor né nong gyipa
Jealousy and so on, we have committed mistakes:
dorjé lobpön tönpa dronmé la
To the torch-like teacher, the vajra master,
nying né mé ching damtsik nyampa dang
We have been deeply disrespectful, and impaired our samayas,
damtsik chikpé dorjé pün nam la
Towards our vajra brothers and sisters who share the same commitments,
ngen sem lokpar tawa la sokpa
We have held cruel intentions, mistaken views and so on—
ku yi damtsik nyampa tol lo shak
All these impairments in the samayas of enlightened body, we now confess!

yidam lha yi chak gya ma sal shying
We have not visualized clearly the ‘mudrā’ of the yidam deity,
ngak kyi nyenpa drang lé chépa dang
We have interrupted the recitation of the approach mantra,
dü druk lé kyi chöpa khyépar du
And failed to practise at the six times, but, in particular,
nyen drup kongwé choga ma gyi té
We have not performed the fulfilment rituals of approach and accomplishment,
ka tar ma chok shyung shyin ngo ma tok
And are incapable of following commands or written instructions—
sung gi damtsik nyampa tol lo shak
All these impairments in the samayas of enlightened speech, we now confess!

dorjé lobpön jampé kadrin gyi
Through the loving kindness of the vajra master,
nyen khung gyü né sem kyi kyil du shyak
His words have poured through our ears into the centre of our hearts,
tuk kyi mengak jinpé damtsik dré
But we pollute the samaya by revealing the wisdom‑mind instructions,
sang tsam dé né cholwar mé la sok
And crossing the bounds of secrecy with our mindless chatter and so forth—
tuk kyi damtsik nyampa tol lo shak
All these impairments in the samayas of enlightened mind, we now confess!

chö nam nyampa nyi du ma tok té
We have failed to realize the equality of all phenomena—
yenlak damtsik nyampa tol lo shak
Impairments of the branch samayas, we now confess!

lé lo nyom lé nyi kyi wang gyur té
We have been overcome by laziness, indifference and lethargy—
nyen drup damtsik nyampa tol lo shak
Impairments of the samayas of approach and accomplishment, we now confess!

lü ngak yi kyi sung ja dépa yi
We have failed to keep the commitments with body, speech and mind—
ku sung tuk kyi damtsik nyampa shak
Impairments of the samayas of enlightened body, speech and mind, we now confess!

jetsün lama nam kyi chen lam du
In the enlightened presence of our venerable teachers,
yo ché jor tsok chungwa tol lo shak
Our material offerings have been meagre and insubstantial—this we now confess!

yidam lha tsok nam kyi chen lam du
In the enlightened presence of the yidam deities,
ngön tok pong len chépa tol lo shak
We have held preferences, favouring some while rejecting others—this we now confess!

khandro dé shyi nam kyi chen lam du
In the enlightened presence of the four classes of ḍākinī,
khé lang dam ché nyampa tol lo shak
We have impaired our pledges and commitments—this we now confess!

chö kyong sungma nam kyi chen lam du
In the enlightened presence of the dharma protectors and guardians,
torma lo dar gyangpa tol lo shak
We have allowed months and years to pass without offering tormas—this we now confess!

dü sum pa ma nam kyi chen lam du
In the presence of our mothers and fathers from past, present and future,
drin len len gyi ma jal tol lo shak
We have not repaid them for their kindness—this we now confess!

ché dang cham dral nam kyi chen lam du
In the presence of our vajra brothers and sisters and consorts,
damtsik tsé dung chungwa tol lo shak
We confess that our commitment and affection have been weak!

dro druk semchen nam kyi chen lam du
In the presence of the beings of the six realms,
nying jé pen sem chung wa tol lo shak
We confess that our compassion and altruism have been weak!

so sor tarpa nam kyi dompa dang
Any impairments and breakages in the vows of individual liberation,
changchub sempa nam kyi labpa dang
The discipline of the bodhisattvas,
rigpa dzinpa ngak kyi damtsik sok
Mantra commitments of the vidyādharas and so on,
nyampa tamché tol shak mi chab bo
All these we now confess without hiding or concealing anything.

mi bé len ché chö ching dompar gyi
From now on we will refrain from all such acts, and vow never to repeat them again.
dü sum chépé dik drip tol shak na
As we confess all our harmful acts and obscurations of the past, present and future,
tsangpar dzé né ku sung tuk la sok
Let them all be completely purified, and so grant us, we pray,
chok dang tün mong ngö drup tsal du sol
Attainments, ordinary and supreme, of body, speech and mind!

From the final chapter of the Immaculate Confession Tantra.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2003.

Version: 1.2-20211001